---
layout: post
title: UTLK - CHAPTER 1 Introduction
category: [ utlk ]
---

# Kernel Architecture
Monolithic v.s. microkernels. Like most Unix kernels, Linux is monolithic:
single binary in one address space. The major advantage a monolithic kernel has
over a microkernel is performance, because there aren't many inter-process
messaging as the latter has. That said, microkernels have a few legitimate pros
on its own:

  - Modularized design. Many kernel components are broken down to smaller
    binaries and inter-process communication requires well designed interfaces
  - Portability. Because the platform dependant portion is stripped down to a
    minimal (only the main kernel), it's easier to port a microkernel to a
different platform
  - Better memory performance. Unneeded kernel code isn't loaded into memory,
    unlike a monolithic one which is always mapped at its entirety.

To achieve some of the above advantages, Linux offers _modules_:

  - Modules force good modular design. Interface between a module and the main
    kernel should be well designed.
  - Platform independence.
  - Frugal memory usage. Tiny systems like embedded devices can choose to not
    load all modules.
  - No performance penalty. Loading and unloading a module is much cheaper than
    creating and destroying a process like in the microkernel model.

# An Overview of the Unix Filesystem
At the heart of the Unix operating system is its file system.

## Files and Directories
A file is a sequence of bytes. A file system is a user level abstraction of the
data stored on physical devices like a hard disk, because user processes don't
interact with devices directly.

A directory contains information about the files and directories beneath it.

## Hard and Soft Links
A file can have multiple names, in the form of _links_. A file is only deleted
when its number of links decreases to zero. Links have two major limitations:

  - Links to directories are not allowed. This is to prevent cycles the
    directory tree.
  - Links can not cross filesystems. There might be multiple of them mounted at
    the same time, for example from two hard drives, or two partitions on the
same drive.

To mitigate those limitations, there exist _soft links_. They are called so to
distinguish from the regular links. Soft links can be created for directories,
and can cross file system boundaries. To create a soft link:

```shell
ln -s <target> <link>
```

## File Types
  - Regular files, directories, symlinks
  - Block device files, character device files, pipes, sockets

## File Descriptor and Inode
Unix distinguishes between the _contents_ of a file, and the _metadata_ of a
file. The former is purely a sequence of bytes, while the latter is a data
structure that holds information like creation time, owner, access rights, etc.
The latter is often called the _inode_. Each file has its own inode.

## Access Rights and File Mode
Owner, group, other, read, write, execute, suid, sgid, sticky.
_Note_: the "sticky" bit on an executable tells the kernel not to release its
code block from memory even when the process that executes it has terminated. It
has been deprecated.

## File-Handling System Calls
### Opening a file
```C
  fd = open(path, flag, mode)
```

The return value, `fd`, is the File Descriptor, which is an index to an _open
file object_, which contains information about the current read offset (file
pointer), pointers to kernel functions that the process can invoke, and etc.

### Accessing an opened file
`read`, `lseek`.

### Closing a file
`close`.

### Renaming and deleting a file
These operations are actually on the directory that the file is in. To delete a
file, use `unlink(pathname)`. As can be tell from the function name, this
decreases the link of the file by one. It won't be deleted until the link number
drops to zero.

# An Overview of Unix Kernels
A quick overview of almost all aspects of a Unix kernel.

## The Process/Kernel Model
CPUs have multiple execution states, two of them are "Kernel Mode" and "User
Mode". In Unix, user processes run in "User Mode", while kernel threads run in
"Kernel Mode". In the majority of time, some user process is running on the CPU
while the kernel is largely asleep, except for a few lightweight "kernel
threads". There are a few cases where the main kernel body will be run:

  - When a user process explicitly requests the kernel through a _system call_.
  - When some _exception_ happens while executing a user process, e.g., page
    fault.
  - When a hardware device _interrupts_ the CPU through a signal.

## Process Implementation
The kernel isn't a process, but a process manager. The implementation of a
process involves the "pause" and "resume" of one. To pause a running process, its
states are dumped into a data structure, the _process descriptor_. To resume,
the kernel loads the CPU with those states, thus the process can continue
running like it never stopped. The information that is dumped and loaded
include:

  - The program counter (PC) and stack pointer (SP) registers
  - The general purpose registers
  - The floating point registers
  - The memory management registers used to keep track of memory accessed by the
    process
  - ...

## Reentrant Kernels
All Unix kernels are re-entrant. This means a kernel execution path can be
suspended, while another takes over the CPU, and then resumed when the latter
finishes.

## Process Address Space
Every process runs in its private address space. When switched into kernel mode,
it runs in its private kernel address space.

There are a couple of exceptions where the same memory region may be shared
among processes:

  - A commonly used program's code section is loaded into memory and shared
    among all processes that use it. Examples are editors, and shared libraries.
When this happens it is usually done automatically by the kernel without the
user noticing.
  - Two user processes could explicitly request that a region of memory to be
    shared. This is enabled for Inter-Process Communication (IPC), and is
usually referred to as "shared memory".

  - User processes could use the `mmap()` system call to map a file, or a block
    device (essentially also a file) into its address space. This is usually to
facilitate data read or write. The mapped file can be shared with other
processes.

## Signals and Interprocess Communication
Signals is a way for the kernel to notify user processes of _system events_:
asynchronous events like a terminal interrupt (SIGINT) or synchronous events
like failure to access a memory location (SIGSEGV). POSIX defines about 20
signals, two of which are user-definable. User processes can write code to
handle the receipt of a signal, either to ignore it, or execute something
asynchronously. If none is defined, the kernel has some _default actions_
depending on the type of the signal.

While signals are one-way communication from the kernel to user processes, Unix
provides another communication mechanism to allow two user processes to pass
information to one another, and that is called Inter-Process Communication or
IPC in short. Three main implementations are Shared Memory, Semaphores, and
Message Queues. The kernel implements these constructs as _IPC resources_. Like
files, IPC resources are persistent. User processes need to destroy them when
unused.

# Process Management
Note the distinction between a process and the _program_ it executes. A process
can be created with the `fork()` system call and terminated by `_exit()` while
a program can be loaded into a newly created process by `exec()`.

## Zombie processes
When a process is  terminated, it is put into the _zombie_ status, until its
parent calls the `wait4()` syscall or something similar, upon which the kernel
will release the resources held by the child process.

If the parent process terminates without calling `wait4()` on its children, the
kernel makes the _init_ process parent of those child processes, which
periodically calls `wait4()` on all its children.

## Process groups and login sessions
A process group, or a _job_, is a convenient way to manage multiple processes
that represent a single "job" abstraction. For example, `$ ls | sort | more`.

A login session is a higher level container that has information about all
processes, or process groups, started in the same shell login session. Only one
group of them can be in the _foreground_, and multiple can be in the background.
The shell internal commands `bg` and `fg` can be used to toggle a process group
between background and foreground.

# Memory Management
Memory management (MM) is the most complex activity in a Unix kernel. A third of
this book talks about memory management. The essence of MM is to efficiently
share a fixed amount of resource (memory frames) between a large number of
concurrent processes.

## Virtual memory
The concept of virtual memory makes sharing easier: each process thinks it is
given a large, contiguous, private memory chunk to operate on. With the help of
a dedicated hardware unit, the Memory Management Unit or MMU, whose sole purpose
is to translate virtual memory addresses to physical memory addresses, virtual
memory management can be very efficient.

A major problem that virtual memory must solve is fragmentation: though a memory
allocation request should only fail when there is not enough free pages left,
the kernel is often forced to use contiguous physical memory.

## Random access memory usage
_Editor's note_: I personally think this section can be better titled as "RAM
partition".

Modern Unix operating systems partition the entire physical memory space into
two areas: a few megabytes reserved for the kernel code and static data
structures (the kernel image), and the rest that can be used for:
  - To satisfy kernel requests for dynamic memory like buffers, file
    descriptors, etc.
  - To satisfy user process memory allocation requests, e.g., `malloc()`.
  - Cache for disk contents or other buffered devices.

## Kernel Memory Allocator
The Kernel Memory Allocator (KMA) is the subsystem that satisfies memory
allocation requests from _all parts of the system_. A good implementation has to
be fast, make efficient use of memory, minimize fragmentation, and work well
with other memory management subsystems. There are a few algorithms, and the
Linux kernel uses a Slab allocator on top of a buddy system.

## Process virtual address space handling
An address space is the set of addresses assigned to a process. When the kernel
does this assignment, it assigns a _list_ of address regions such as code
region, data region (uninitialized and initialized), shared memory, and the
heap. User processes can expand their address space by calling `malloc()` or
`brk()`.

Copy-on-write. As mentioned earlier, a process is created by forking its parent
process. To minimize page duplication, the parent's page frames are assigned to
the child process but with read-only permission. When the child first tries to
write to one of the pages, it gets duplicated and a new frame is assigned to the
child.

## Caching
Disks are very slow compared with RAM, and it is not uncommon that a process may
read data once read or written by a process that doesn't exist any more. Caching
disk contents in RAM can save a lot of time reading disks.

The `sync()` syscall exists for explicit flushing of "dirty" pages (cache pages
that differ from its on-disk copy) on to disks.

# Device Drivers
The last but not least part of a Unix operating system is device drivers. Linux
has a good separation between the device driver code and the rest of the kernel
code, through a well defined interface. This interface makes it possible for the
kernel to access ALL drivers in a uniform way, and allows device manufactures to
add new devices without knowing the kernel source code.
