---
layout: post
title: UTLK - CHAPTER 3 Processes
category: [ utlk ]
toc: true
---

* TOC
{:toc}

## Processes, Lightweight Processes, and Threads

In this book, the term "process" refers to an instance of a program in
execution. From the kernel's point of view, a process is _an entity to which
system resources (CPU time, memory, etc.) are allocated_.

In older Unix systems, when a process is created, it shares the same code as its
parent (the `text` segment) while having its own `data` segment so that changes
it makes won't affect the parent and vice versa. Modern Unix systems need to
support _multithreaded_ applications, i.e., multiple execution flows of the same
program need to share some section of the data segment. In earlier Linux kernel
versions, multithreaded applications are implemented in User Mode, by the POSIX
threading libraries (pthread).

In newer Linux versions, Light Weight Processes (LWP) are used to create
threads.  LWPs are processes that can share some resources like open files, the
address space, and so on. Whenever one of them modifies a shared resource, the
others immediately see the change. A straight forward way to implement
multithreaded applications is to associate a LWP to each user thread. Many
pthread libraries do this.

**Thread Groups**. Linux uses thread groups to manage a set of LWPs, which
together act as a whole with regards to some system calls like `getpid()`,
`kill()`, `_exit()`. We are going to discuss these at length later, but
basically these syscalls all use the thread group leader's ID as process ID,
treating a group of LWPs as one process.
