---
layout: post
title: UTLK - CHAPTER 3 Processes
category: [ utlk ]
toc: true
---

* TOC
{:toc}

# Processes, Lightweight Processes, and Threads

In this book, the term "process" refers to an instance of a program in
execution. From the kernel's point of view, a process is _an entity to which
system resources (CPU time, memory, etc.) are allocated_.

In older Unix systems, when a process is created, it shares the same code as its
parent (the `text` segment) while having its own `data` segment so that changes
it makes won't affect the parent and vice versa. Modern Unix systems need to
support _multithreaded_ applications, i.e., multiple execution flows of the same
program need to share some section of the data segment. In earlier Linux kernel
versions, multithreaded applications are implemented in User Mode, by the POSIX
threading libraries (pthread).

In newer Linux versions, Light Weight Processes (LWP) are used to create
threads.  LWPs are processes that can share some resources like open files, the
address space, and so on. Whenever one of them modifies a shared resource, the
others immediately see the change. A straight forward way to implement
multithreaded applications is to associate a LWP to each user thread. Many
pthread libraries do this.

**Thread Groups**. Linux uses thread groups to manage a set of LWPs, which
together act as a whole with regards to some system calls like `getpid()`,
`kill()`, `_exit()`. We are going to discuss these at length later, but
basically these syscalls all use the thread group leader's ID as process ID,
treating a group of LWPs as one process.

# Process Descriptor

Process descriptor is the data structure that encodes everything the kernel
needs to know about a process - whether is running on a CPU or blocked on some
events, its scheduling priority, address space allocated, open files, etc. In
Linux, the type [task_struct] is defined for process descriptors (figure 3-1).
The six data structures on the right hand side refer to specific _resources_
owned by the process, and will be covered in future chapters. This chapter
focuses on two of them: process state and process parent/child relationships.

![fig-3-1](/assets/utlk-fig-3-1.jpg)
Figure 3-1. The Linux Process Descriptor

[task_struct]: https://github.com/wonderfly/linux-2.6.11.12/blob/master/include/linux/sched.h#L528

## Process State

This field describes the state of the process - running, stopped etc. The
current implementation defines it as an array of flags (bits), each describes a
possible state. All states are mutually exclusive, hence at any given time, only
one flag is set and others are all cleared. Possible states
([source][task_states]):

  - `TASK_RUNNING`. The process is either running on a CPU or _waiting to be
    executed_.
  - `TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE`. The process is suspended (sleeping) until some
    condition is met - an hardware interrupt (e.g., disk controller), a lock is
    released, a signal is received, etc.
  - `TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE`. Similar to above, except that delivering a signal to
    the sleeping process leaves its state unchanged. That is, it can be waken up
    only when if certain condition is met, say, a hardware interrupt.
  - `TASK_STOPPED`. Process execution has been stopped; upon receiving
    `SIGSTOP`, `SIGTSTP`, `SIGTTIN` or `SIGTTOU`.
  - `TASK_TRACED`. Process execution has been stopped by a debugger - think
    `ptrace`.

Apart from these five states, the `state` field (and the `exit_state` field) can
have two additional states. As their name suggests, a process can reach on of
these states only when they are terminated:

  - `EXIT_ZOMBIE`. Process is terminated, but its parent hasn't called `wait4()`
    or `waitpid()` yet. This state is important because the kernel cannot
    discard a process's descriptor until its parent has called a `wait()`-like
    syscall as per a Unit design principle. This will be detailed later in this
    chapter.
  - `EXIT_DEAD`. The final state: the process is being _removed_ from the system
    because its parent has called `wait4()` or `waitpid()` for it. The next
    phase of the process' life is the descriptor being deleted. So you may ask, "why
    not just delete the descriptor already?". Well, having this last state is useful
    to avoid race conditions due to other threads that execute `wait()`-like calls
    on the same process (see Chapter 5).

The value of the state field is usually set with a simple assignment, e.g.:

    p->state = TASK_RUNNING;

The kernel also uses the [set_task_state] and [set_current_state] macros to set
the state of a specified process or the current running process. These macros
also ensure atomicity of these instructions. See Chapter 5 for more details on
this.

[task_states]: https://github.com/wonderfly/linux-2.6.11.12/blob/master/include/linux/sched.h#L106
[set_task_state]: https://github.com/wonderfly/linux-2.6.11.12/blob/master/include/linux/sched.h#L116
[set_current_state]: https://github.com/wonderfly/linux-2.6.11.12/blob/master/include/linux/sched.h#L121

## Identifying a Process

**Process descriptor pointers**. Each execution context that can be scheduled
independently must have its own process descriptor; even lightweight processes
(threads) have their own `task_struct`. The strict one-to-one mapping between
processes and process descriptors makes the address of the `task_struct`
structure a useful means for the kernel to identify processes. These addresses
are referred to as _process descriptor pointers_.

**PIDs**. On the other hand, users like to address a process by an integer
called the _Process ID or PID_. To satisfy this requirement the kernel stores
PID in the `pid` field of the `task_struct`. PIDs are numbered sequentially and
there is an upper limit (determined by `/proc/sys/kernel/pid_max`). When the
kernel reaches this limit, it must start recycling the lower, unused PIDs. If
the rate of process/thread creation exceeds the rate of PID recycle, process
creation is going to fail with likely an `EAGAIN (-11)` error. The default for
`/proc/sys/kernel/pid_max` is usually 32K, and can be lifted up to 4,194,303 on
a 64-bit system.

**pidmap_array**. When recycling PID numbers, the kernel needs to know which of
the 32K numbers are currently assigned and which are unused. It uses a bit map
for that, called the [pidmap_array]. On 32-bit systems, a page contains 32K bits
(4K bytes), which is perfect for storage of a `pidmap_array`. On 64-bit systems,
multiple pages might be needed for the `pidmap_array` depending on the value of
`/proc/sys/kernel/pid_max`. These pages are never released.

**Threads**. Each lightweight process has its own PID. To satisfy the user
application requirement that multi-threaded applications should have only one
PID, the kernel groups lightweight processes that belong to the same application
(thread group), and makes system calls like `getpid()` return the PID of the
_thread group leader_. In each LWP's `task_struct`, the `tgid` field stores the
PID of the thread group leader and for the thread group leader itself, that
value is equal to its `pid` value.

**PID to process descriptor pointer**. Many system calls like `kill()` use PID
to denote the affected process. It is thus important to make the process
descriptor lookup efficient. As we will see soon enough, Linux has a few tricks
to do that.

[pidmap_array]: https://github.com/wonderfly/linux-2.6.11.12/blob/master/kernel/pid.c#L60

## Relationships Among Processes

