---
layout: post
title: Build Up Spanish Vocabulary Programmatically
category: [ spanish ]
toc: true
---

* TOC
{:toc}

# Background

I am trying to build up my Spanish vocabulary by reading books. Every week I
learn about 200 new words. I've been using Quizlet in the past to put new words
into *study sets* which are basically sets of flash cards. With 200 new words
every week it's almost impossible to type them in by hand. I am a software
engineer, so naturally I seek a programmatic way, to scale up. Here in this
post I write about the solution I have come up with, and as you will see shortly
it is pretty effective.

# Children's books

My Spanish vocabulary is limited to reading children's books. Every two weeks I
borrow a new book from the library. In my first round I try to go through the
entire book before stopping for new words, while circling them out throughout
the process. At the end, I typically get about 200 new words that I need to
study.

# Translate

Now that I have circled out 200 words from the book, I create a Google
Spreadsheet, and start typing each word in the vertical column. Once I am done
typing, I copy the column, and paste it to the column next to it. I select the
entire second column, and click "Add-ons" > "Translate My Sheet" > "Start a new
translation". In the pop-out window, I select the source and target languages,
and select "Override cells". Once I click the "Translate" button, a magic
sequence happens and all the words in the second column will be replaced by
their English translations.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/RXes-tLLo_w"
frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope;
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

# Flashcards

So that saved me a lot of time typing and translating each word using Google
Translate or SpanisDict, but having it in a spreadsheet isn't as handy as in the
flashcards that I like a lot from Quizlet and TinyCards. I read online that
Quizlet does have an API that can be used to create cards programmatically, but
for some reason they've *paused* the API since December 2018. So I needed to
find an alternative.

## Anki

A number of search results pointed to this open sourced flash card application
that lets you bulk create flash cards from a CSV file. It has a desktop version
(Mac, Windows, Linux) and a mobile version (iPhone,
[Android](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ichi2.anki&hl=en_US)).
Better yet, you could sync the cards you've created on your desktop to your
mobile app - exactly what I wanted, via a free web service called AnkiWeb. You
do have to sign up for an account and acknowledge some privacy agreements, but
if you are only uploading third-grade Spanish words you probably don't care too
much. It's clearly stated on the website that it is run by the money the Anki
developers get from the paid iPhone app so they may start charging in the future
for the sync service if that revenue couldn't sustain the cost of running the
service. I like their honesty.

Anyway, I installed the Mac version on my iMac, downloaded the Google
Spreadsheet I just made as a CSV file (the Google Spreadsheet UI lets you do
that), and "imported" it into the Anki app as a new set. As can be seen from the
following screenshot, it took almost no time to load a 200 word set.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/0rPTlCbs9wM"
frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope;
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

# Sync

Now that I've created a new deck, how do I get it on my Android app? Well, I
first need to upload the new deck through the Mac app to AnkiWeb.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ng65XQJFEOU"
frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope;
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

If I go to the web UI of AnkiWeb now, I can see that the new deck has just been
uploaded. I can browse cards and study right from the web UI if I wanted. But I
could also log in to AnkiWeb on my AnkiDroid app, and in a few seconds I will
see the same deck there too. It's that easy.

# Summary

To summarize, I read a book, circling out the new words while reading it. When I
finish reading, I go to my computer, and type those new words in a Google
Spreadsheet. With the help of the Google Translate "add-on", I get the
translations of every word in less than a minute. I download the spreadsheet as
a CSV file, import it into the Anki app on my iMac. That will create a new deck
with all the word pairs automatically. After syncing with AnkiWeb, I go to my
AnkiDroid app and do the sync there, I get to see the same deck. Ready to study!
